Updates based on recent changes and discussion on RFC PR #262 (#5)
annarev/community: rfcs/20200612-stream-executor-c-api.md

       *    The C APIs may be changed during the initial experimental phase based
            on developer experience and feedback. When the APIs become more mature,
            we will try to keep them stable (in a best-effort manner) until the new
            TensorFlow stack is available.

# Design Proposal

[StreamExecutorInterface](https://cs.opensource.google/tensorflow/tensorflow/+/master:tensorflow/stream_executor/stream_executor_internal.h;l=166?q=StreamExecutorinterface)
has a large number of methods, some of which are only sporadically used.
Therefore, we plan to wrap only a subset of key `StreamExecutorInterface`
functionality. We decided on this subset based on the [PluggableDevice](https://github.com/tensorflow/community/pull/262) 
usecase as well as potential future devices such as TPUs.

## Versioning Strategy and Stability
StreamExecutor C API follows Semantic Versioning 2.0.0 ([semver](http://semver.org/)).
Each release version has a format `MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`, as outlined in
[TensorFlow version compatibility](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/versions#semantic_versioning_20).
We also use struct sizes to track compatibility. More details on functionality

> extension and deprecation in [StreamExecutor C API Versioning Strategy](20200612-stream-executor-c-api/C_API_versioning_strategy.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension and deprecation can be found in [StreamExecutor C API Versioning Strategy](20200612-stream-executor-c-api/C_API_versioning_strategy.md).
```

The C API will have an initial bake-in period, where we won’t have any
compatibility guarantees. However, we will make the best effort to perform any
updates in a backwards compatible way. For example, we plan to keep track of

> struct sizes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
struct sizes.  During this period, the API will be kept at `MAJOR` version 0.
```

The C API will be placed in [tensorflow/c/experimental](https://cs.opensource.google/tensorflow/tensorflow/+/refs/tags/v2.3.0:tensorflow/c/experimental/).
We will consider moving the API out of the experimental directory once it is
more stable.

## Implementation Conventions

> * Struct prefix indicates whether struct fields should be filled by the plug-in or core implementation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Struct prefix indicates whether struct fields should be filled by the plug-in or core TensorFlow implementation:
```

  * `SE_`: Set/filled by core, unless marked otherwise.
  * `SP_`: Set/filled by plug-in, unless marked otherwise.
  * This prefix rule only applies to structures. Enumerations and methods are all prefixed with `SE_`.
* Structs begin with two fields:
  * `size_t struct_size`: Stores the unpadded size of the struct.

>   * `void* ext`: A free-form field that can be populated by a plugin in `SP_*` structs or potential future extension points in `SE_` structs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `void* ext`: A reserved field that may be populated by a plugin in `SP_*` structs or potential future extension points in `SE_` structs. Must be set to zero by default if it unused.
```

> * We use `struct_size` for version checking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We use `struct_size` for version checking by both core and plug-in.
```

>   * It is exempt from the `SE/SP` rule above and should be set both by core and plug-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * It is exempt from the `SE/SP` rule above and must be set both by core and plug-in.
```
RFC 2119

Author: Thank you for the detailed review, Situ! (I know you're not done yet. Just committing one batch of changes first.)

> RFC 2119

What do you mean by `RFC 2119`?

>   * It can be checked to determine which struct fields are available for current version of TensorFlow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * It can be checked programmatically to determine which struct fields are available in the structure.
```

| Create stream executor | `SP_PlatformFns::create_stream_executor` | `SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams` | `SP_StreamExecutor` |
| Create timer functions | `SP_PlatformFns::create_timer_fns` | None | `SP_TimerFns` |
| Get allocator stats | `SP_StreamExecutor::get_allocator_stats` | None | `SP_AllocatorStats` |
| Memory management | `SP_StreamExecutor::*allocate*`, `SP_StreamExecutor::*memcpy*` | None | `SP_DeviceMemoryBase` |

### Registration
Core TensorFlow will register a new StreamExecutor platform as well as a new TensorFlow device with [DeviceFactory](https://cs.opensource.google/tensorflow/tensorflow/+/master:tensorflow/core/common_runtime/device_factory.h;l=30?q=DeviceFactory).
1. Core TensorFlow links to plug-in's dynamic library and loads the function `SE_InitPlugin`.
2. Core TensorFlow populates `SE_PlatformRegistrationParams` and passes it in a call to `SE_InitPlugin`.
    * In `SE_InitPlugin`, plug-in populates `SE_PlatformRegistrationParams::SP_Platform` and `SE_PlatformRegistrationParams::SP_PlatformFns`.
3. Core TensorFlow can now create a device, a stream executor, and a timer through functions in `SP_PlatformFns`.

>     * Core TensorFlow populates `SE_CreateDeviceParams` and pass it in a call to `SP_PlatformFns::create_device`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Core TensorFlow populates `SE_CreateDeviceParams` and pass it as a parameter to  `SP_PlatformFns::create_device()`. 
```

        * Plug-in populates `SE_CreateDeviceParams::SP_Device`.

>     * Core TensorFlow populates `SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams` and pass it in a call to `SP_PlatformFns::create_stream_executor`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Core TensorFlow populates `SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams` and pass it to `SP_PlatformFns::create_stream_executor()`.
```

  int64_t largest_free_block_bytes;
} SP_AllocatorStats;

#define SP_ALLOCATORSTATS_STRUCT_SIZE \
  TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SP_AllocatorStats, largest_free_block_bytes)

// Potential states for an SP_Event. If `poll_for_status` returns anything aside
// from kPending or kComplete, an error has occurred; kUnknown is a bad state.
typedef enum SE_EventStatus {
  SE_EVENT_UNKNOWN,
  SE_EVENT_ERROR,
  SE_EVENT_PENDING,
  SE_EVENT_COMPLETE,
} SE_EventStatus;

// Memory allocation information.
// This matches DeviceMemoryBase defined here:
// https://cs.opensource.google/tensorflow/tensorflow/+/refs/tags/v2.3.0:tensorflow/stream_executor/device_memory.h;l=57
typedef struct SP_DeviceMemoryBase {
  size_t struct_size;
  void* ext;  // free-form data set by plugin
  // Platform-dependent value representing allocated memory.
  void* opaque;
  uint64_t size;     // Size in bytes of this allocation.
  uint64_t payload;  // Value for plugin's use
} SP_DeviceMemoryBase;

#define SP_DEVICE_MEMORY_BASE_STRUCT_SIZE \

>   TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SP_DeviceMemoryBase, size)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SP_DeviceMemoryBase, payload)
```

(Please check the original .h to see that the bug isn't there as well.)

Author: @annarev just fixed it in https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow/commit/c533255de41b0155e3517950126af43a6f8eb233. So fast!

#define SP_DEVICE_STRUCT_SIZE TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SP_Device, device_handle)

typedef struct SE_CreateDeviceParams {
  size_t struct_size;
  void* ext;        // reserved for future use
  int32_t ordinal;  // device index

  SP_Device* device;  // Input/output, struct_size set by TF for plugin to read.
                      // Subsequently plugin fills the entire struct.
} SE_CreateDeviceParams;

#define SE_CREATE_DEVICE_PARAMS_STRUCT_SIZE \
  TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SE_CreateDeviceParams, device)

typedef struct SP_StreamExecutor {
  size_t struct_size;
  void* ext;  // reserved for future use

  /*** ALLOCATION CALLBACKS ***/
  // Synchronously allocates `size` bytes on the underlying platform and returns
  // `SP_DeviceMemoryBase` representing that allocation. In the case of failure,

>   // nullptr is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // NULL is returned.
```

  // `memory_space` is reserved for a potential future usage and should be set
  // to 0.
  void (*allocate)(const SP_Device* device, uint64_t size, int64_t memory_space,
                   SP_DeviceMemoryBase* mem);

  // Deallocate the device memory previously allocated via this interface.

>   // Deallocation of a nullptr-representative value is permitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Deallocation of a NULL representative value is permitted.
```

  void (*deallocate)(const SP_Device* device, SP_DeviceMemoryBase* memory);

  // Allocates a region of host memory and registers it with the platform API.
  // Memory allocated in this manner is required for use in asynchronous memcpy
  // operations, such as `memcpy_dtoh`.
  void* (*host_memory_allocate)(const SP_Device* device, uint64_t size);

  // Deallocates a region of host memory allocated by `host_memory_allocate`.
  void (*host_memory_deallocate)(const SP_Device* device, void* mem);

  // Allocates unified memory space of the given size, if supported. Unified
  // memory support should be added by setting `supports_unified_memory` field
  // in `SP_Platform`.

>   void* (*unified_memory_allocate)(const SP_Device* device, uint64_t bytes);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  void* (*unified_memory_allocate)(const SP_Device* device, uint64_t size);
```

To be consistent with the above.

                           TF_Status* status);

  // Causes the host code to synchronously wait for the event to complete.
  void (*block_host_for_event)(const SP_Device* device, SP_Event event,
                               TF_Status* status);

  // [Optional]
  // Causes the host code to synchronously wait for operations entrained onto
  // stream to complete. Effectively a join on the asynchronous device
  // operations enqueued on the stream before this program point.
  // If not set, then corresponding functionality will be implemented
  // by registering an event on the `stream` and waiting for it using
  // `block_host_for_event`.
  void (*block_host_until_done)(const SP_Device* device, SP_Stream stream,
                                TF_Status* status);

  // Synchronizes all activity occurring in the StreamExecutor's context (most
  // likely a whole device).
  void (*synchronize_all_activity)(const SP_Device* device, TF_Status* status);

>   // Enqueues on a stream a user-specified function to be run on the host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Enqueues on a stream a user-specified function to be run on the host. `ctx` will be passed into the callback function when invoked.
```

>   // `callback_arg` should be passed as the first argument to `callback_fn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // `callback_arg` shall be passed as the first argument to `callback_fn`.
```

Reviewer 2: This is an instruction for the plugin author. Therefore "should" or "must" seems better.

Reviewer: It needs to be passed into callback_fn as part of the design requirement. Stating `should` leaves room for ambiguity but does seem more polite. How about _shall_?

Author: I'm okay with either. "Shall" does sound a bit more forceful than "should" and more polite than "must". Let me know what you agree upon. :)

Reviewer 2: All sound good to me. As a non-native speaker, I can't really tell the small differences between the three :)
I just though `will` sounds like the argument will be passed in by itself. However, it is plugin's responsibility to make sure it is passed in. (I was replying to the comment when it had `will`.)

Author: Oh, I didn't see that it was "will" before. Alright, "shall" shall be used then.

  TF_Bool (*host_callback)(SP_Device* device, SP_Stream stream,
                           SE_StatusCallbackFn callback_fn, void* callback_arg);
} SP_StreamExecutor;

#define SP_STREAMEXECUTOR_STRUCT_SIZE \
  TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SP_StreamExecutor, host_callback)

typedef struct SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams {
  size_t struct_size;
  void* ext;  // reserved for future use

  SP_StreamExecutor* stream_executor;  // output, to be filled by plugin
} SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams;

#define SE_CREATE_STREAM_EXECUTOR_PARAMS_STRUCT_SIZE \
  TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams, stream_executor)

typedef struct SP_Platform {
  size_t struct_size;

>   void* ext;  // free-form data set by plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  void* ext;  // reserved for future use
```

Reviewer 2: `SP_Platform` is populated by the plugin. Therefore, `void* ext` is meant to be a field that plugin can set to anything they want. It is not reserved for future use.

Author: I'm resolving this one without making changes then. Please feel free to unresolve it if the change should still be made.

  // Platform name. Must be null-terminated.
  const char* name;

  // Device type name, for example GPU. Must be null-terminated.
  const char* type;

>   // Number of visible devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Number of visible devices.
```

(nit)

  size_t visible_device_count;

  // Whether this platform supports unified memory.

>   // Unified memory is a single memory address space accessible from any device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Unified memory is a single memory address space that virtualizes device and host memory addresses and accessible to both the device and host.
```

Author: "and accessible" sounds a bit weird because there is "that virtualizes" in between "and accessible" and the first "is". How about this?
```suggestion
  // Unified memory is a single memory address space that virtualizes device and host memory addresses. It is accessible to both the device and host.
```

Reviewer: LGTM!

  SP_PlatformFns* platform_fns;  // output, set by plugin
  // Clean up fields inside SP_Platform that were allocated
  // by the plugin. `platform` itself should not be deleted here.
  void (*destroy_platform)(SP_Platform* platform);  // out, set by plugin
  void (*destroy_platform_fns)(
      SP_PlatformFns* platform_fns);  // out, set by plugin
} SE_PlatformRegistrationParams;

#define SE_PLATFORM_REGISTRATION_PARAMS_STRUCT_SIZE \
  TF_OFFSET_OF_END(SE_PlatformRegistrationParams, destroy_platform_fns)

void SE_InitPlugin(SE_PlatformRegistrationParams* params, TF_Status* status);

#ifdef __cplusplus
}  // extern "C"
#endif
```

### PlatformId

StreamExecutor [Platform](https://cs.opensource.google/tensorflow/tensorflow/+/master:tensorflow/stream_executor/platform.h;l=114) has an id parameter. This parameter will be hidden from the C API and set
internally by TensorFlow instead.

## Usage Example
Code example for [PluggableDevice](https://github.com/tensorflow/community/pull/262)
registration outlined in the [Usage Overview](#Usage overview) section.

### Core TensorFlow
```cpp
typedef void (*SEInitPluginFn)(SE_PlatformRegistrationParams*, TF_Status*);
...

> void* initialize_sym = dlsym(plugin_dso_handle, "SE_InitPlugin");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// On Windows, use `GetProcAddress` instead of `dlsym`.
void* initialize_sym = dlsym(plugin_dso_handle, "SE_InitPlugin");
```

Author: Nice! :D

if (!initialize_sym) {
  // Output error and skip this plug-in.
}
SEInitPluginFn initialize_fn = reinterpret_cast<SEInitPluginFn>(initialize_sym);

SE_PlatformRegistrationParams params;

> TF_Status* status = TF_NewStatus();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TF_Status status;
```

> TF_Status* status = TF_NewStatus();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TF_Status status;

initialize_fn(&params, &status);
```

Reviewer 2: `TF_Status* status = TF_NewStatus();` is correct. But `initialize_fn(&params, &status);` should instead be changed to `initialize_fn(&params, status);`

Reviewer: I made that nit, that TF_NewStatus() seems to imply heap allocation as it returns a pointer (from another scope). This is an anti-pattern because the allocation can be avoided. As examples are often modeled after by others and sometimes copy-pasted, I think we should fix it.

I do agree with you that it technically works but I think we can suggest a better pattern.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good.

Reviewer: Thanks for accepting my feedback!

Author: Using `TF_Status status` sounds good. I was using the pointer form following the test file.

Unfortunately, this suggestion doesn't cover the existing ```initialize_fn(&params, status);``` line. So we will have two duplicate `initialize_fn` calls after this commit (that is purely from accepting suggested changes).  I'll edit the old one out in a separate commit.

                   TF_Status* status) {
  params->device->device_handle = get_my_device_handle();
  ...
}
void create_stream_executor(const SP_Platform* platform,
                            SE_CreateStreamExecutorParams* params,
                            TF_Status* status) {
  params->stream_executor->memcpy_htod = my_device_memcpy_from_host_function;
  ...
}
void create_timer_fns(const SP_Platform* platform, SP_TimerFns* timer_fns,
                      TF_Status* status) {
  timer_fns->nanoseconds = nanoseconds;
  ...
}
void destroy_device(const SP_Platform* platform, SP_Device* device) {
  // Destroy device handle here.
}
void destroy_stream_executor(const SP_Platform* platform,
                             SP_StreamExecutor* se) {
  // Perform any clean up needed for stream executor.
}
void destroy_timer_fns(const SP_Platform* platform, SP_TimerFns* timer_fns) {
  // Destroy timer functions here.
}
```

Define `SE_InitPlugin` that TensorFlow will call when registering the device
plug-in:

```cpp
void SE_InitPlugin(SE_PlatformRegistrationParams* params, TF_Status* status) {
  int32_t visible_device_count = 2;
  std::string name = "MyDevice";
  std::string type = "GPU";

>   params->platform->name = name.c_str();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Sets struct_size to a valid value, and zero initializes other attributes.
  *params = { SE_PLATFORM_REGISTRATION_PARAMS_STRUCT_SIZE };
  params->platform->name = name.c_str();
```

Author: Nice catch. Thank you!
